# NTT

If you are interested in the inner mechanics of NTT, you've come to the right place

First, let's disect what the NTT transform really is:

*NTT evaluates the polynomial at special points and returns something like a frequency distribution*

This will be much clearer at the end (hopefully)

## NTT Transform

First of all, the polynomial has to exist on a ring and the coefficients have to be constrained by a modulo. So let's define:

- Modulus `q = 13`
- Ring size `n = 4`, therefore our ring is limited by $x^4 = -1$

### nth primitive root of unity

I will not go too in-depth on this one. Basically, we are looking for a number `w` that satisfies

$w^n \equiv 1 \pmod q$

In our case, that is `w = 8`

### Computation

Assuming we have polynomial like this:

$a = 2 + 3 x + 2 x^2 + 3 x^3$

We basically need to evaluate the polynomial at `n` points. These points are:

- $w^0 = 1 \pmod 13$
- $w^1 = w \pmod 13$
- $w^2 \pmod 13$
- $w^3 \pmod 13$

These points modulo 13 are: `1, 8, 12, 5`

Now evaluate the polynomial at those points

$A_1 = 2 + 3 + 2 + 3 = 10 \pmod 13$

$A_2 = 2 + 24 + 128 + 1536 = 1690 = 0 \pmod 13$

And continuing on a similar note, we end up with the NTT transform: `[10, 0, 11, 0]`

**Note**: When dealing with modulo, you can apply it basically after each step. Here It would be customary to make the intermediates (like 24, 128 and 1536) also `(mod) 13` before adding them up.

## Multiplication

The simplest part.

Suppose we wanted to multiply the polynomial with itself (`a = b`). Then we need the NTT representations of both.

`A = NTT_Transform(a) = [10, 0, 11, 0]`

`B = NTT_Transform(b) = [10, 0, 11, 0]`

Now we perform element-wise multiplication (mod 13)

`C = A * B = [100, 0, 121, 0] = [9, 0, 4, 0] (mod 13)`

The value `C` is now the NTT representation of the result polynomial

## Inverse NTT

As it turns out, NTT is an inversible operation. And the inverse is pretty similar with just two small tweaks.

### Modular inverses

Once again, not going too deep with this. A simple equation for modular inverse is as follows:

The number `x` is a modular inverse of `a` under mod `q` when:

$x * a \equiv 1 \pmod q$

In our example the inverse of `w` is $w^{-1} = 5$

$8 * 5 \equiv 1 \pmod 13$

And the inverse of `n` is $n^{-1} = 10$

$4 * 10 \equiv 1 \pmod 13$

### Computation

Now just once again, compute the values of the polynomial with the coefficients of the NTT transform at the special points. But this time, we are not using the powers of `w` as our special points, we are using the powers of $w^{-1}$ as our special points.

To calculate the *inverse* NTT transform, you calculate the value at the modular *inverse* of `w`!

$c_1 = 9 + 0 + 4 + 0 = 13 = 0 \pmod 13$

$c_2 = 9 + 0 + 100 + 0 = 109 = 5 \pmod 13$

And so on ...

`c = [0, 5, 0, 5]`

And one last operation - we multiply the whole polynomial by $n^{-1}$

$5 * 10 = 50 = 11 \pmod 13$

`res = [0, 11, 0, 11]`

Or

$res = 11 x + 11 x^3$

And that's it ladies and gentlemen!
